docs/src/content/en/docs/mastra-code/modes.mdx, before:

---
title: "Modes | Mastra Code"
description: "Learn how Mastra Code's three operating modes — Build, Plan, and Fast — shape the agent's behavior, tool access, and response style."
packages:
  - "mastracode"
---

# Modes

Mastra Code operates in one of three modes, each tailored to a different kind of task. Modes control which tools the agent has access to, how it approaches problems, and which default model it uses.

Switch modes with the `/mode` slash command.

## Build mode

Build mode is the default. The agent has full access to all tools — reading, writing, editing files, and running shell commands.

Use Build mode when you want the agent to make changes to your codebase: implementing features, fixing bugs, refactoring code, or running tests.

### Working style

- **Simple tasks** (typo fixes, single-file changes): The agent acts immediately without planning.
- **Non-trivial tasks** (3+ files, architectural decisions): The agent creates a task list, works through each step, and verifies changes before moving on.

### Implementation loop

For each change, the agent follows this cycle:

1. **Understand**: Read the relevant code and check existing conventions.
1. **Implement**: Make the change following existing patterns.
1. **Verify**: Run tests, type-check, or manually confirm the behavior.
1. **Clean up**: Remove debug statements and ensure no half-done work.

### Approved plans

When a plan is approved in Plan mode, Mastra Code automatically switches to Build mode and injects the plan into the agent's instructions. The agent then implements the plan step by step.

## Plan mode

Plan mode is read-only. The agent can explore the codebase but cannot modify files or run side-effect commands.

Use Plan mode when you want to analyze architecture, design an approach, or create a detailed implementation plan before writing code.

### Available tools

- `view`: Read files and list directories
- `search_content`: Search file contents
- `find_files`: Find files by pattern
- `execute_command`: Only for read-only commands (`git status`, `git log`, `git diff`)

### Plan submission

When the agent finishes analyzing the codebase, it submits a structured plan using the `submit_plan` tool. The plan includes:

- **Overview**: What the change does and why.
- **Complexity estimate**: Size, risk level, and dependencies.
- **Steps**: Specific files, changes, and rationale in dependency order.
- **Verification**: What tests to run and what to check.

After submission, you can:

- **Approve**: Mastra Code switches to Build mode and begins implementation.
- **Reject**: Stay in Plan mode.
- **Request changes**: Provide feedback for the agent to revise and resubmit.

## Fast mode

Fast mode prioritizes speed and brevity. The agent uses a faster model and keeps responses short.

Use Fast mode for quick lookups, simple questions, and small edits where latency matters more than depth.

### Rules

- Responses stay under 200 words unless the task requires more.
- No planning phase; the agent acts directly.
- For general programming questions, the agent answers from knowledge without searching the codebase.
- For project-specific questions, the agent reads the relevant code and answers concisely.

## Default models

Each mode has a default model that's selected when you switch to it:

| Mode | Default model |
| - | - |
| Build | `anthropic/claude-opus-4-6` |
| Plan | `openai/gpt-5.2-codex` |
| Fast | `cerebras/zai-glm-4.7` |

Override the model for any mode using the `/models` command. Per-mode model selections persist to the thread, so switching back to a mode restores the last model you used in it.

:::note

Visit [`createMastraCode()` reference](/reference/mastra-code/createMastraCode) for details on configuring custom modes and default models.

:::

## Subagents

In Build mode, the agent can spawn subagents to parallelize work. Subagents run as focused, independent tasks with their own tool access:

| Subagent | Access | Use case |
| - | - | - |
| **Explore** | Read-only | "Find all usages of X", "How does module Y work" |
| **Plan** | Read-only | "Create an implementation plan for X", "Analyze the architecture of Y" |
| **Execute** | Read + write | "Implement feature X", "Fix bug Y", "Refactor module Z" |

The parent agent spawns subagents only when multiple tasks can run in parallel. For a single task, the agent handles it directly. Subagent outputs are treated as untrusted — the parent agent verifies results before moving on.

## Thinking level

For Anthropic models that support extended thinking, you can control the thinking depth through the `/settings` panel. Options range from `off` (no thinking) to higher levels that enable more detailed reasoning at the cost of additional latency and tokens.

## YOLO mode

YOLO mode auto-approves all tool calls without prompting. It's enabled by default and can be toggled through `/settings`. When disabled, Mastra Code prompts for approval before executing write operations or shell commands, based on the [permission system](/docs/mastra-code/tools#permission-system).

Commit message:

feat(mastracode): wire reasoning effort for OpenAI Codex models (#13490)
gpt-5.3-codex skips tool calls and narrates instead of acting when
`reasoningEffort` isn't set in the API request. This wires the existing
`/think` UI setting through to the Codex middleware so reasoning
actually gets enabled.

The `/think` command now shows an inline selector (like `/models:pack`)
instead of just cycling through levels. You can also pass a level
directly: `/think high`. It warns you if the current model doesn't
support reasoning but still allows selection.

Switching to an OpenAI model pack auto-sets thinking to `low` if it was
`off`, so Codex models work out of the box. Also bumps the default Codex
model from gpt-5.2 to gpt-5.3.

## Thinking level revamp

- Dropped `minimal` level (was redundantly mapping to same API value as
`low`)
- Added `xhigh` level for GPT-5.2+ and Codex models
- Levels are now: `off`, `low`, `medium`, `high`, `xhigh`
- Provider-specific values (e.g. `none`, `xhigh`) shown next to labels
when an OpenAI model is selected
- Non-OpenAI models show a soft warning but still allow level selection

<!-- This is an auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai
-->
## Summary by CodeRabbit

* **New Features**
* Added reasoning effort levels (off, low, medium, high, xhigh) for the
/think command with OpenAI Codex and GPT-5.2+ models
* /think accepts a level argument (e.g., /think high) and shows an
interactive selector when run without args
* Shows provider-specific reasoning values next to labels for OpenAI
models
* Switching to OpenAI packs auto-enables reasoning at low if it was off
* Warns when the current model doesn’t support reasoning; default Codex
updated to a newer version
<!-- end of auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai -->

---------

Co-authored-by: Tyler Barnes <tylerdbarnes@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: Mastra Code (openai/gpt-5.2-codex) <noreply@mastra.ai>

docs/src/content/en/docs/mastra-code/modes.mdx, after:

---
title: "Modes | Mastra Code"
description: "Learn how Mastra Code's three operating modes — Build, Plan, and Fast — shape the agent's behavior, tool access, and response style."
packages:
  - "mastracode"
---

# Modes

Mastra Code operates in one of three modes, each tailored to a different kind of task. Modes control which tools the agent has access to, how it approaches problems, and which default model it uses.

Switch modes with the `/mode` slash command.

## Build mode

Build mode is the default. The agent has full access to all tools — reading, writing, editing files, and running shell commands.

Use Build mode when you want the agent to make changes to your codebase: implementing features, fixing bugs, refactoring code, or running tests.

### Working style

- **Simple tasks** (typo fixes, single-file changes): The agent acts immediately without planning.
- **Non-trivial tasks** (3+ files, architectural decisions): The agent creates a task list, works through each step, and verifies changes before moving on.

### Implementation loop

For each change, the agent follows this cycle:

1. **Understand**: Read the relevant code and check existing conventions.
1. **Implement**: Make the change following existing patterns.
1. **Verify**: Run tests, type-check, or manually confirm the behavior.
1. **Clean up**: Remove debug statements and ensure no half-done work.

### Approved plans

When a plan is approved in Plan mode, Mastra Code automatically switches to Build mode and injects the plan into the agent's instructions. The agent then implements the plan step by step.

## Plan mode

Plan mode is read-only. The agent can explore the codebase but cannot modify files or run side-effect commands.

Use Plan mode when you want to analyze architecture, design an approach, or create a detailed implementation plan before writing code.

### Available tools

- `view`: Read files and list directories
- `search_content`: Search file contents
- `find_files`: Find files by pattern
- `execute_command`: Only for read-only commands (`git status`, `git log`, `git diff`)

### Plan submission

When the agent finishes analyzing the codebase, it submits a structured plan using the `submit_plan` tool. The plan includes:

- **Overview**: What the change does and why.
- **Complexity estimate**: Size, risk level, and dependencies.
- **Steps**: Specific files, changes, and rationale in dependency order.
- **Verification**: What tests to run and what to check.

After submission, you can:

- **Approve**: Mastra Code switches to Build mode and begins implementation.
- **Reject**: Stay in Plan mode.
- **Request changes**: Provide feedback for the agent to revise and resubmit.

## Fast mode

Fast mode prioritizes speed and brevity. The agent uses a faster model and keeps responses short.

Use Fast mode for quick lookups, simple questions, and small edits where latency matters more than depth.

### Rules

- Responses stay under 200 words unless the task requires more.
- No planning phase; the agent acts directly.
- For general programming questions, the agent answers from knowledge without searching the codebase.
- For project-specific questions, the agent reads the relevant code and answers concisely.

## Default models

Each mode has a default model that's selected when you switch to it:

| Mode | Default model |
| - | - |
| Build | `anthropic/claude-opus-4-6` |
| Plan | `openai/gpt-5.2-codex` |
| Fast | `cerebras/zai-glm-4.7` |

Override the model for any mode using the `/models` command. Per-mode model selections persist to the thread, so switching back to a mode restores the last model you used in it.

:::note

Visit [`createMastraCode()` reference](/reference/mastra-code/createMastraCode) for details on configuring custom modes and default models.

:::

## Subagents

In Build mode, the agent can spawn subagents to parallelize work. Subagents run as focused, independent tasks with their own tool access:

| Subagent | Access | Use case |
| - | - | - |
| **Explore** | Read-only | "Find all usages of X", "How does module Y work" |
| **Plan** | Read-only | "Create an implementation plan for X", "Analyze the architecture of Y" |
| **Execute** | Read + write | "Implement feature X", "Fix bug Y", "Refactor module Z" |

The parent agent spawns subagents only when multiple tasks can run in parallel. For a single task, the agent handles it directly. Subagent outputs are treated as untrusted — the parent agent verifies results before moving on.

## Thinking level

You can control thinking depth through the `/settings` panel (or `/think`). Stored levels remain `off`, `low`, `medium`, `high`, and `xhigh` across providers. For OpenAI models, the UI shows provider-specific labels (for example, `Very High (xhigh)`), while non-OpenAI models keep generic labels.

## YOLO mode

YOLO mode auto-approves all tool calls without prompting. It's enabled by default and can be toggled through `/settings`. When disabled, Mastra Code prompts for approval before executing write operations or shell commands, based on the [permission system](/docs/mastra-code/tools#permission-system).
