docs/src/mastra-code/tools.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Tools'
description: "Learn about Mastra Code's built-in tools for file viewing, editing, search, shell execution, web search, and task management."
packages:
  - 'mastracode'
---

# Tools

Mastra Code provides built-in tools that the agent uses to interact with your codebase. Each tool is designed for a specific task, and the agent selects the right one based on what it needs to do.

## File tools

### `view`

Read file contents with line numbers or list directory contents. The agent uses this tool before editing a file.

- Displays line-numbered output (like `cat -n`) for easy reference.
- For directories, lists files up to 2 levels deep, excluding hidden items.
- Supports `view_range` to read specific line ranges in large files.
- Output is truncated if the file exceeds the token limit. Use `view_range` to read specific sections.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | Path to the file or directory (relative to project root) |
| `view_range` | `[number, number]` | No | Line range `[start, end]` to view a section of the file |

### `string_replace_lsp`

Edit a file by replacing an exact text match with new content. Returns Language Server Protocol (LSP) diagnostics showing any errors or warnings introduced by the edit.

- The agent reads the file first with `view` before editing.
- `old_str` must be an exact substring of the current file content.
- Include enough surrounding context to uniquely identify the replacement location.
- When `new_str` is omitted or empty, the matched text is deleted.
- After editing, TypeScript errors, linting warnings, and other diagnostics are returned automatically.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | Path to the file |
| `old_str` | `string` | Yes | Exact text to find and replace |
| `new_str` | `string` | No | Replacement text (omit to delete the matched text) |
| `start_line` | `number` | No | Line number to narrow the search region |

### `ast_smart_edit`

Edit code using abstract syntax tree (AST) analysis for intelligent, structure-aware transformations. Powered by [ast-grep](https://ast-grep.github.io/), this tool understands code structure rather than treating files as raw text.

Supported transformations:

- **Pattern-based search and replace**: Find and replace code using AST patterns with `$VARIABLE` placeholders (e.g., replace `console.log($ARG)` with `logger.debug($ARG)`).
- **Add/remove imports**: Intelligently insert or remove import statements.
- **Rename functions**: Rename function declarations and all call sites with scope awareness.
- **Rename variables**: Rename variable declarations and all references.
- **Selector queries**: Find AST nodes matching a CSS-like selector (e.g., `"FunctionDeclaration"`).

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | File path relative to project root |
| `pattern` | `string` | No | AST pattern to search for (supports `$VARIABLE` placeholders) |
| `replacement` | `string` | No | Replacement pattern (can use captured `$VARIABLES`) |
| `selector` | `string` | No | CSS-like selector for AST nodes |
| `transform` | `string` | No | Transformation type: `add-import`, `remove-import`, `rename-function`, `rename-variable`, `extract-function`, `inline-variable` |
| `targetName` | `string` | No | Name of the target element (for rename/remove operations) |
| `newName` | `string` | No | New name (for rename operations) |
| `importSpec` | `object` | No | Import specification for `add-import`: `{ module, names, isDefault? }` |

### `write_file`

Create a new file or overwrite an existing file entirely.

- Use for creating new files. For editing existing files, prefer `string_replace_lsp`.
- Parent directories are created automatically if they don't exist.
- If overwriting an existing file, the agent reads it first with `view`.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | File path to write to (relative to project root) |
| `content` | `string` | Yes | Full content to write to the file |

## Search tools

### `search_content`

Search file contents using regular expressions. Uses ripgrep when available, falling back to grep.

- Supports full regex syntax (e.g., `"function\\s+\\w+"`, `"import.*from"`).
- Respects `.gitignore` automatically in Git repositories.
- Always preferred over running `grep` or `rg` via `execute_command`.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `pattern` | `string` | Yes | Regex pattern to search for in file contents |
| `path` | `string` | No | Directory or file to search in (relative to project root, defaults to project root) |
| `glob` | `string` | No | Glob pattern to filter files (e.g., `"*.ts"`, `"*.{js,jsx}"`, `"test/**"`) |
| `contextLines` | `number` | No | Number of lines to show before and after each match (default: 0) |
| `maxResults` | `number` | No | Maximum number of matching lines to return (default: 100) |
| `caseSensitive` | `boolean` | No | Whether the search is case-sensitive (default: true) |

### `find_files`

Find files by name pattern using glob matching. Results are sorted by modification time (most recent first).

- Supports standard glob syntax: `*` (any characters), `**` (any path segments), `?` (single character), `{a,b}` (alternatives).
- Respects `.gitignore` automatically in Git repositories.
- Always preferred over running `find` or `ls` via `execute_command`.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `pattern` | `string` | Yes | Glob pattern (e.g., `"**/*.ts"`, `"src/**/*.test.*"`, `"**/package.json"`) |
| `path` | `string` | No | Directory to search in (relative to project root, defaults to project root) |

## Shell execution

### `execute_command`

Execute a shell command in the project directory.

- Use for Git commands, package managers (`npm`, `pnpm`), build tools, test runners, Docker, and other terminal operations.
- Commands run with a 30-second default timeout. Use the `timeout` parameter for longer operations.
- Output is stripped of ANSI codes and streamed to the TUI in real time.
- Pipe to `| tail -N` for commands with long output — full output streams to the user, but only the last N lines are returned to the agent.
- The `CI=true` environment variable is set automatically to prevent interactive prompts.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `command` | `string` | Yes | Shell command to execute |
| `cwd` | `string` | No | Working directory (defaults to project root) |
| `timeout` | `number` | No | Timeout in seconds (default: 30) |

### `request_sandbox_access`

Request access to directories outside the project root. The user is prompted to approve or deny the request.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | Absolute path to the directory needing access |
| `reason` | `string` | Yes | Explanation of why access is needed |

## Web tools

### `web_search`

Search the web for documentation, error messages, package APIs, and other information.

This tool is available through two providers:

- **Tavily**: When the `TAVILY_API_KEY` environment variable is set.
- **Anthropic web search**: Built into Anthropic models, used as a fallback when no Tavily key is configured.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `query` | `string` | Yes | The search query |
| `searchDepth` | `"basic" \| "advanced"` | No | Search depth (default: `"basic"`) |
| `maxResults` | `number` | No | Maximum number of results (default: 10) |
| `includeImages` | `boolean` | No | Include related images (default: false) |

### `web_extract`

Extract the full content of one or more web pages. Requires a Tavily API key (`TAVILY_API_KEY`).

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `urls` | `string[]` | Yes | URLs to extract content from (max 20) |
| `extractDepth` | `"basic" \| "advanced"` | No | Extraction depth (default: `"basic"`) |
| `includeImages` | `boolean` | No | Include extracted image URLs (default: false) |

## Task management

### `task_write`

Create or update a structured task list for tracking progress on complex, multi-step work.

- Each task has a `content` (imperative form), `status` (`pending`, `in_progress`, `completed`), and `activeForm` (present continuous form shown during execution).
- Pass the full task list each time — it replaces the previous list.
- Only one task should be `in_progress` at a time.

### `task_check`

Check the completion status of the current task list. The agent uses this before finishing to verify all tasks are complete.

## Interactive tools

### `ask_user`

Ask the user a structured question. The agent uses this when it needs clarification, wants to validate assumptions, or needs the user to make a decision. Questions render inline in the conversation flow and support optional multiple-choice options.

### `submit_plan`

Submit a structured implementation plan for user review and approval (Plan mode only). The plan renders inline, and the user can approve, reject, or request changes.

## MCP tools

When [MCP servers](/configuration#mcp-servers) are configured, their tools are automatically available to the agent. MCP tools are namespaced as `serverName_toolName` to avoid collisions with built-in tools.

MCP tools fall under the `mcp` permission category. When YOLO mode is disabled, they require approval before execution.

## Tool availability by mode

Not all tools are available in every mode:

| Tool | Build | Plan | Fast |
| - | - | - | - |
| `view` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `search_content` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `find_files` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `execute_command` | Yes | Read-only | Yes |
| `string_replace_lsp` | Yes | No | Yes |
| `ast_smart_edit` | Yes | No | Yes |
| `write_file` | Yes | No | Yes |
| `web_search` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `web_extract` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `task_write` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `task_check` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `ask_user` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `submit_plan` | No | Yes | No |
| `request_sandbox_access` | Yes | Yes | Yes |

In Plan mode, `execute_command` is available but restricted to read-only commands (`git status`, `git log`, `git diff`, etc.).

## Permission system

Tools are grouped into four categories, each with a configurable approval policy:

| Category | Tools | Default policy |
| - | - | - |
| **Read** | `view`, `search_content`, `find_files`, `web_search`, `web_extract` | `allow` |
| **Edit** | `string_replace_lsp`, `ast_smart_edit`, `write_file`, `subagent` | `ask` |
| **Execute** | `execute_command` | `ask` |
| **MCP** | All MCP server tools | `ask` |

When YOLO mode is enabled (the default), all categories are set to `allow`. When disabled, the agent prompts for approval based on the category policy.

You can configure per-category or per-tool overrides through `/settings`, and session-level grants let you approve a category once for the rest of the session.

:::note

Visit [Modes](/modes) for details on how modes affect tool access and approval behavior.

:::

Commit message:

fix(mastracode): resolve edit tool paths like execute_command (#13526)
## Summary
- make `string_replace_lsp` project-root aware via
`createStringReplaceLspTool(projectRoot?)`
- make `ast_smart_edit` project-root aware via
`createAstSmartEditTool(projectRoot?)`
- wire dynamic tools, subagent tools, and default subagent tools to use
project-scoped edit tool instances (same pattern as `execute_command`)
- add regression tests covering relative path resolution for
`string_replace_lsp`, `ast_smart_edit`, `write_file`, and dynamic tool
wiring
- update Mastra Code tools docs and add a `mastracode` patch changeset

## Validation
- `pnpm --filter mastracode test --
src/tools/__tests__/project-root-resolution.test.ts`

Fixes #13522


<!-- This is an auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai
-->
## Summary by CodeRabbit

* **Bug Fixes**
* Fixed relative path resolution in edit tools to properly resolve
against the configured project root.

* **Tests**
* Added comprehensive test suite validating project-root path resolution
for edit tools.

* **Documentation**
* Clarified that relative file paths are resolved against the project
root.
<!-- end of auto-generated comment: release notes by coderabbit.ai -->

docs/src/mastra-code/tools.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Tools'
description: "Learn about Mastra Code's built-in tools for file viewing, editing, search, shell execution, web search, and task management."
packages:
  - 'mastracode'
---

# Tools

Mastra Code provides built-in tools that the agent uses to interact with your codebase. Each tool is designed for a specific task, and the agent selects the right one based on what it needs to do.

## File tools

### `view`

Read file contents with line numbers or list directory contents. The agent uses this tool before editing a file.

- Displays line-numbered output (like `cat -n`) for easy reference.
- For directories, lists files up to 2 levels deep, excluding hidden items.
- Supports `view_range` to read specific line ranges in large files.
- Output is truncated if the file exceeds the token limit. Use `view_range` to read specific sections.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | Path to the file or directory (relative to project root) |
| `view_range` | `[number, number]` | No | Line range `[start, end]` to view a section of the file |

### `string_replace_lsp`

Edit a file by replacing an exact text match with new content. Returns Language Server Protocol (LSP) diagnostics showing any errors or warnings introduced by the edit.

- The agent reads the file first with `view` before editing.
- `old_str` must be an exact substring of the current file content.
- Include enough surrounding context to uniquely identify the replacement location.
- When `new_str` is omitted or empty, the matched text is deleted.
- After editing, TypeScript errors, linting warnings, and other diagnostics are returned automatically.
- Relative `path` values are resolved against the project root.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | Path to the file (relative to project root) |
| `old_str` | `string` | Yes | Exact text to find and replace |
| `new_str` | `string` | No | Replacement text (omit to delete the matched text) |
| `start_line` | `number` | No | Line number to narrow the search region |

### `ast_smart_edit`

Edit code using abstract syntax tree (AST) analysis for intelligent, structure-aware transformations. Powered by [ast-grep](https://ast-grep.github.io/), this tool understands code structure rather than treating files as raw text.

Supported transformations:

- **Pattern-based search and replace**: Find and replace code using AST patterns with `$VARIABLE` placeholders (e.g., replace `console.log($ARG)` with `logger.debug($ARG)`).
- **Add/remove imports**: Intelligently insert or remove import statements.
- **Rename functions**: Rename function declarations and all call sites with scope awareness.
- **Rename variables**: Rename variable declarations and all references.
- **Selector queries**: Find AST nodes matching a CSS-like selector (e.g., `"FunctionDeclaration"`).

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | File path relative to project root |
| `pattern` | `string` | No | AST pattern to search for (supports `$VARIABLE` placeholders) |
| `replacement` | `string` | No | Replacement pattern (can use captured `$VARIABLES`) |
| `selector` | `string` | No | CSS-like selector for AST nodes |
| `transform` | `string` | No | Transformation type: `add-import`, `remove-import`, `rename-function`, `rename-variable`, `extract-function`, `inline-variable` |
| `targetName` | `string` | No | Name of the target element (for rename/remove operations) |
| `newName` | `string` | No | New name (for rename operations) |
| `importSpec` | `object` | No | Import specification for `add-import`: `{ module, names, isDefault? }` |

### `write_file`

Create a new file or overwrite an existing file entirely.

- Use for creating new files. For editing existing files, prefer `string_replace_lsp`.
- Parent directories are created automatically if they don't exist.
- If overwriting an existing file, the agent reads it first with `view`.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | File path to write to (relative to project root) |
| `content` | `string` | Yes | Full content to write to the file |

## Search tools

### `search_content`

Search file contents using regular expressions. Uses ripgrep when available, falling back to grep.

- Supports full regex syntax (e.g., `"function\\s+\\w+"`, `"import.*from"`).
- Respects `.gitignore` automatically in Git repositories.
- Always preferred over running `grep` or `rg` via `execute_command`.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `pattern` | `string` | Yes | Regex pattern to search for in file contents |
| `path` | `string` | No | Directory or file to search in (relative to project root, defaults to project root) |
| `glob` | `string` | No | Glob pattern to filter files (e.g., `"*.ts"`, `"*.{js,jsx}"`, `"test/**"`) |
| `contextLines` | `number` | No | Number of lines to show before and after each match (default: 0) |
| `maxResults` | `number` | No | Maximum number of matching lines to return (default: 100) |
| `caseSensitive` | `boolean` | No | Whether the search is case-sensitive (default: true) |

### `find_files`

Find files by name pattern using glob matching. Results are sorted by modification time (most recent first).

- Supports standard glob syntax: `*` (any characters), `**` (any path segments), `?` (single character), `{a,b}` (alternatives).
- Respects `.gitignore` automatically in Git repositories.
- Always preferred over running `find` or `ls` via `execute_command`.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `pattern` | `string` | Yes | Glob pattern (e.g., `"**/*.ts"`, `"src/**/*.test.*"`, `"**/package.json"`) |
| `path` | `string` | No | Directory to search in (relative to project root, defaults to project root) |

## Shell execution

### `execute_command`

Execute a shell command in the project directory.

- Use for Git commands, package managers (`npm`, `pnpm`), build tools, test runners, Docker, and other terminal operations.
- Commands run with a 30-second default timeout. Use the `timeout` parameter for longer operations.
- Output is stripped of ANSI codes and streamed to the TUI in real time.
- Pipe to `| tail -N` for commands with long output — full output streams to the user, but only the last N lines are returned to the agent.
- The `CI=true` environment variable is set automatically to prevent interactive prompts.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `command` | `string` | Yes | Shell command to execute |
| `cwd` | `string` | No | Working directory (defaults to project root) |
| `timeout` | `number` | No | Timeout in seconds (default: 30) |

### `request_sandbox_access`

Request access to directories outside the project root. The user is prompted to approve or deny the request.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `path` | `string` | Yes | Absolute path to the directory needing access |
| `reason` | `string` | Yes | Explanation of why access is needed |

## Web tools

### `web_search`

Search the web for documentation, error messages, package APIs, and other information.

This tool is available through two providers:

- **Tavily**: When the `TAVILY_API_KEY` environment variable is set.
- **Anthropic web search**: Built into Anthropic models, used as a fallback when no Tavily key is configured.

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `query` | `string` | Yes | The search query |
| `searchDepth` | `"basic" \| "advanced"` | No | Search depth (default: `"basic"`) |
| `maxResults` | `number` | No | Maximum number of results (default: 10) |
| `includeImages` | `boolean` | No | Include related images (default: false) |

### `web_extract`

Extract the full content of one or more web pages. Requires a Tavily API key (`TAVILY_API_KEY`).

| Parameter | Type | Required | Description |
| - | - | - | - |
| `urls` | `string[]` | Yes | URLs to extract content from (max 20) |
| `extractDepth` | `"basic" \| "advanced"` | No | Extraction depth (default: `"basic"`) |
| `includeImages` | `boolean` | No | Include extracted image URLs (default: false) |

## Task management

### `task_write`

Create or update a structured task list for tracking progress on complex, multi-step work.

- Each task has a `content` (imperative form), `status` (`pending`, `in_progress`, `completed`), and `activeForm` (present continuous form shown during execution).
- Pass the full task list each time — it replaces the previous list.
- Only one task should be `in_progress` at a time.

### `task_check`

Check the completion status of the current task list. The agent uses this before finishing to verify all tasks are complete.

## Interactive tools

### `ask_user`

Ask the user a structured question. The agent uses this when it needs clarification, wants to validate assumptions, or needs the user to make a decision. Questions render inline in the conversation flow and support optional multiple-choice options.

### `submit_plan`

Submit a structured implementation plan for user review and approval (Plan mode only). The plan renders inline, and the user can approve, reject, or request changes.

## MCP tools

When [MCP servers](/configuration#mcp-servers) are configured, their tools are automatically available to the agent. MCP tools are namespaced as `serverName_toolName` to avoid collisions with built-in tools.

MCP tools fall under the `mcp` permission category. When YOLO mode is disabled, they require approval before execution.

## Tool availability by mode

Not all tools are available in every mode:

| Tool | Build | Plan | Fast |
| - | - | - | - |
| `view` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `search_content` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `find_files` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `execute_command` | Yes | Read-only | Yes |
| `string_replace_lsp` | Yes | No | Yes |
| `ast_smart_edit` | Yes | No | Yes |
| `write_file` | Yes | No | Yes |
| `web_search` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `web_extract` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `task_write` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `task_check` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `ask_user` | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `submit_plan` | No | Yes | No |
| `request_sandbox_access` | Yes | Yes | Yes |

In Plan mode, `execute_command` is available but restricted to read-only commands (`git status`, `git log`, `git diff`, etc.).

## Permission system

Tools are grouped into four categories, each with a configurable approval policy:

| Category | Tools | Default policy |
| - | - | - |
| **Read** | `view`, `search_content`, `find_files`, `web_search`, `web_extract` | `allow` |
| **Edit** | `string_replace_lsp`, `ast_smart_edit`, `write_file`, `subagent` | `ask` |
| **Execute** | `execute_command` | `ask` |
| **MCP** | All MCP server tools | `ask` |

When YOLO mode is enabled (the default), all categories are set to `allow`. When disabled, the agent prompts for approval based on the category policy.

You can configure per-category or per-tool overrides through `/settings`, and session-level grants let you approve a category once for the rest of the session.

:::note

Visit [Modes](/modes) for details on how modes affect tool access and approval behavior.

:::
